# 1. Context

When studying hadronic processes at low energies, one cannot resort to the usual approach of perturbation theory in QCD, as this theory is non-perturbative at this scale. Therefore, one must attempt to make an alternative yet compatible description of nature at this low energy scale, where the "natural" degrees of freedom are no longer individual quarks, as these are now confined inside the hadrons they form. There are many ways in which this can be done.

Since Wilson introduced the idea of employing the lattice as a regulator in QFTs, Lattice QCD has seen an everlasting growth, and has enabled us to perform calculations with QCD at a non-perturbative energy scale, which would have otherwise been impossible. Although the lattice is currently the most employed method, there are other approaches predating it, which usually fall into one of two categories: exact or perturbative. An example of the former are dispersion relations like the ones employed in the Roy equations. *A priori*, these are an exact set of integral equations which aim to describe scattering processes at low energies and they are closely linked to the analytical S-matrix programme. It should be noted that, although some research groups have attempted to solve these equations analytically in the past, they are often eventually treated in an analogous fashion to perturbation theory, in the sense that one usually expands the scattering amplitude in partial waves and truncates the series in the Roy equations to a given value of the angular momentum, as higher order terms are ever more supressed.

Another approach, this time inherently perturbative, is to try to formulate an alternative theory, the language of which is better suited to the problem under consideration: in practice, quarks can only be *probed* at very high energies, and when the energy scale is low (a rule of thumb is the energy is usually below the mass of the $\rho$ meson, although it is sometimes taken somewhat higher, up to the mass of the proton), it is more natural (and more convenient) to take the existing hadrons to be the new degrees of freedom. This is the fundamental idea that underlies chiral perturbation theory (chiPT). It takes advantage of the fact that, in the chiral limit (null quark masses) the QCD Lagrangian does not distinguish among different quark flavours (since they are all massless now) in order to build a theory satisfying this same symmetry. In order to build it, one attempts to gather all the possible combinations of operators satisfying the relevant symmetries (essentially, one needs to end up with a Lorentz-invariant and chirally symmetric Lagrangian) to a given order in momenta. The new degrees of freedom are then the boson Goldstones arising from the spontaneous breaking of the global flavour symmetry found in the QCD Lagrangian in the chiral limit.

As any effective theory, this new Lagrangian shall depend on external parameters that cannot be determined through the theory itself, as this would make it self-sufficient. These parameters essentially encode our ignorance about low-energy Physics, and until relatively recent times, they had to be fit through experimental data, thus engaging in the old game of phenomenology. However, with the rise of Lattice methods, it is now possible to calculate the so-called Low-Energy Constants (LECs) directly from lattice simulations.

# 2. Objectve

The end goal of this internship is simple: to obtain the (renormalized) LECs at NLO from lattice data, previously generated by CLS and kindly shared with me by the IFT

# 3. Motivation

It is proceeding to ask why, if we already have more advanced tools to study hadronic processes at low energies such as Lattice QCD, it is still interesting to this day and age to employ chiPT. There are several layers to this.

## 1. Complexity

It is well-known that, when working in Lattice QCD, the complexity of the calculations increases with some power of the inverse of the pion's mass in the current configuration. Therefore, it is of increasing difficulty to approach the chiral limit with lattice calculations. Of course, one can understand it as a Szymanzik effective theory and carry out an order $\mathcal O(a)$ improvement, but even then, it is technologically to reach the aforementioned limit in our simulations. For chiPT, on the other hand, the closer we get to the chiral limit, the better our predictions will be, since the explicit symmetry breaking of the approximate flavour symmetry in the QCD Lagrangian will be less significant.

## 2. Symbiosis

From the former point, it becomes clear that the lattice and chiPT are not meant to compete against eachother, but rather to describe overlapping scales of the low energy spectrum. Therefore, chiPT is oftentimes used jointly with Lattice QCD to ensure, for instance, that the chiral limit is taken correctly.

## 3. Practicality

Lattice calculations, although powerful, are notably costly. Therefore, if one does not require an extraordinary degree of precision, it is much simpler to resort to a perturbative theory than to carry out the full calculation in the lattice. Of course, one should be careful with when to use chiPT, as the convergence of the theory with three flavours is already quite bad. It is worth noting that it is best used for pion processes, as these are the lightest mesons, and therefore chiPT is expected to work remarkably well in their description. On the other hand, a study of pion processes at low energies in the lattice is possible, and it has been done, but it is far more complex than calculating results in a perturbative theory.

# 4. Motivation for choosing lattice over experiment

It is also worth commenting on the reason why, in this internship, I reject the usual approach to phenomenology and instead prefer to fit the LECs using lattice data. There are two reaons for this choice.

## 1. Testing the validity of QCD at low energies

At first, one could argue that the experiment is *known* to be right, and the lattice results will only be right if QCD is the right theory for hadronic processes at every energy level, which is not yet confirmed. As a matter of fact, investigations carried out in the IFT may point to QCD being the right theory only at a given phase of the quark-matter. However, this is precisely what makes this approach so interesting: by fitting the LECs with lattice data, one can then compare the results with the LECs obtained phenomenologically at the same energy scale and test whether they are consistent. An inconsistency would certainly point at QCD not being fit for this energy scale.

## 2. A self-consistent theoretical approach

Until relatively recent times, phenomenology was the only way to tune the external parameters of an effective theory. However, one can now employ the results obtained in the lattice, which are in no contact whatsoever with the experiment, to fit the same purpose, thus excluding any experiment from the process: the determination is carried out in a completely self-consistent theoretical fashion. As mentioned before, an effective theory cannot determine its external parameters on its own, but admitting QCD is the right theory at the working energy scale, one can emoploy the results obtained from lattice simulations to calculate the LECs, without ever needing to resort to the experiment: I find this to be a more powerful approach, since we are using two descriptions of the same phenomena to test their consistency and thus the validity of eachother and, in the event of finding they are indeed consistent, tuning one by using the other. Of course, the *catch* is the complexity of the lattice calculations, which is the price to pay for not being able to give analytical solutions to QCD problems at energy scales where it is nonperturbative.

# 5. Project structure

The project has the following structure:

- src: this is the heart of the project, it loads the data we want to fit and its error
- fits: one Julia file for each fit carried out
    - details: final value of the parameters of the fit, their error and the contributions of each ensemble to the error
- img: images of the fits, explicitly showing the chiral limit extrapolation whenever this is not divergent in the graph
- util: utilities for propagating error and for plotting the data colour coded by beta values
- doc: useful links and LaTeX-rendered expressions of the data we want to fit